So now we proceed with the technical
solution of the quantum
harmonic oscillator problem.
And I should mention that there exist many
equivalent ways to solve this problem.
But today I am going to present a purely
algebraic solution which is based on
so-called creation/annihilation operators.
I'll introduce them in this video.
And as you will see,
the harmonic oscillator spectrum and
the properties of the wave functions
will follow just from an analysis of
these creation/annihilation operators and
their commutation relations.
We're not going to even write down the
Schroedinger equation as the differential
equation.
We're not going to worry too much
about any boundary conditions.
So these operators and their commutation
relations are going to be sufficient for
us to determine pretty much
everything we want to know.
And the problem that we're actually
solving is the eigenvalue problem for this
operator H with this quadratic potential
corresponding to the harmonic oscillator.
So again, the eigenvalue problem
is H psi is equal to E psi.
Now there are only three dimensional
quantities that appear in our problem
on which our final results, in particular,
the energy spectrum, can possibly depend.
And these quantities are the particle
mass, the frequency of the oscillator,
and the Planck constant,
which is always there.
And it turns out that you can construct
just one parameter out of these guys which
has the physical dimension of energy,
and this parameter is h times omega.
So this has the physical
dimension of energy.
So whatever our spectrum is going to
look like, it must scale as h omega.
It must be proportional to h omega.
So motivated by this, let me write down
my Hamiltonian H divided by this h omega.
And it's going to be simply I
first will write the potential
energy term m omega x
squared over 2h bar plus
the kinetic energy p squared
over 2m omega over h bar.
So I just switch the order in which these
two terms appear in this Hamiltonian.
And the next step I'm going to use
is also going to be pretty strange
from any point of view.
So I'm going to describe
the first term as the (square root
of m omega over 2h bar x)
squared plus the second term
likewise is going to be (p
over 2m omega h bar) squared.
And now so the reason I wrote it this
way is because I want to use an analogue
of the following expression that
we know from elementary calculus.
Namely, that if we have two variables,
let's say A squared minus B squared,
we can write it as (A-B)(A+B).
Or an equivalent expression to
this involving complex numbers,
if we have A squared plus B squared, so
we can write it as (A-iB)(A+iB).
And when we square the imaginary constant,
it's going to give rise
to the plus sign here.
So in this expression
I'm going to associate
the first term with A and
the second term with B.
And so what I'm going to write
is going to be the following.
So I will represent my
Hamiltonian divided by h omega,
this energy scale in the problem,
as, well,
this guy square root of
m omega over 2h bar x
minus i momentum divided
by this whole thing,
times the same thing but
with a plus sign here.
So m omega over 2h bar x plus
i p over 2m omega h bar.
At this stage I have to admit that
I have cheated very seriously
in this derivation and
this equation contains an error.
And as a matter of fact, there are some
missing terms that I have omitted.
And in the next individual quiz,
you're suppose to catch me and
tell me where exactly I have cheated.
So hopefully most of you have
figured out where the problem is.
And of course, the problem is in that
the objects that appear in our quantum
mechanical problem are not
just some variables.
Indeed, these are operators.
And for the operators,
in particular for operators x and
p, it actually matters in which
order they appear in an equation.
So x times p is not equal to p times x.
So in other words,
these operations do not commute.
And so if we try to re-derive this
identity for these operators,
we're going to see, of course, that
they're going to be cross terms appearing.
And so therefore, there is an addition to
this guy, so let me write it explicitly.
So these terms that I have omitted so
it's equal to -i over 2 h bar,
the commutator of x and p.
And so this commutator of x and
p is equal to xp-px.
You can verify that this term
indeed appears just by expanding
this product term by term and
making sure that we've reproduced
the Hamiltonian in the left-hand side.
One other thing that we can verify by
looking at this expression is that
the first bracket is at Hermitian
conjugate of the second bracket.
So indeed, x and p are physical operators
and as such they are Hermitian operators.
So x dagger is equal to x and
p dagger is equal to p by definition.
Therefore, if I Hermitian conjugate,
let's say, the second bracket so
x will remain x, p will remain p,
all the constants here are real and
the only thing that's going to
happen is that i will become -i, so
we will produce the first
bracket in this expression.
Based on this fact,
let me introduce a new operator,
so we'll just call the second
bracket an operator a.
And the first bracket is going
to be Hermitian conjugate too,
therefore a dagger.
And going a bit ahead of myself,
let me mention that these operators,
a dagger and a, are called creation and
annihilation operators.
And the following discussion and
derivation will contain
a proof that these operators,
these guys, indeed deserve the name
of creation/annihilation operators.
But to explain the reason behind
this terminology right away,
let me advertise the main result
before we actually derive it.
And the main result here is the energy
spectrum or the harmonic oscillator,
which, as we shall see, contains
a series of equidistant energy levels,
that is, energy levels such that
any neighboring pair of levels
are separated from one
another by the same energy.
And this energy happens to be h omega,
exactly the energy scale
we discussed previously.
And the energy of the ground state,
the lowest-energy state is h omega over 2.
And by the way, this h omega
over 2 comes exactly from this
additional term that we
have in this identity.
And so the importance of
creation/annihilation operators are in
the following.
So let's say if we prepare
our quantum oscillator
in the ground state, so let me
symbolically represent it by a dot here.
So let's say we have an oscillator
in the ground state.
And if we apply a creation
operator a dagger,
it will create essentially a quantum
of energy h omega by promoting
this oscillator from the ground
state to the first excited state.
If we apply it again, so then we
will go from the first excited state
to the second excited state, etc., etc.
So if we apply it, let's say,
a dagger ten times,
we will go from the ground state
to the tenth excited state.
And you can probably guess that the action
of the operator a is opposite to it.
So if we, say, have a quantum
state with n equals 1, so this
is the first excited state, but line a
were going to go back to the ground state.
Okay, so essentially these operators a and
a dagger, they move us
between the states in
this energy landscape.
And in the next video we're going
to prove all these statements, and
this proof will rely in a very
essential way on various commutation
relations between the operators involved
here, x, p, a, and then a dagger.